what does it take to become the world
champion of public speaking hey everyone
my name is Wade Patterson and I am your
host for this the second episode of keys
from Keynotes and it was my absolute
honor to speak with muhamad katani who
is the 2015 Toastmasters world champion
of public speaking and if you haven't
seen Muhammad speech I'm going to link
to it in the show notes ensure that you
check out this speech because it is
absolutely incredible you'll watch it
and have no question of why Moab won the
competition that year but we dive deeper
than that in this conversation we go
back to Muhammad's childhood and the
fact that he dealt with an incredible
speech impediment at a very young age
and it was something he faced ridicule
over but he was challenged to face that
fear head on and so he talked about
doing that and how it didn't go
perfectly the first time but but his
persistence he kept doing it he kept
facing his fear until he overcame this
Challenge and now look at him 2009 he
joins Toast Masters by 2015 he is the
world champion of public speaking and
then we talk about well how did he craft
that world championship speech what went
into it how did he use humor what did
his introduction look like and why are
introductions essential to powerful
speeches and then what was it like after
afterward he wins this world
championship title was there Fame was
there money Muhammad's incredibly candid
in this conversation and then toward the
end we dive into a few other interesting
subjects things like what is the best
thing about Toast Masters and what is
the worst thing about Toast Masters I
know you're going to love this the
second episode of keys from Keynotes
well hi there and welcome to keys from
Keynotes my name is Wade Patterson keys
from Keynotes is an interview revie
series that Taps into the knowledge and
expertise of some of the world's
greatest public speakers and on this
episode I'm joined by 2015 world
champion of public speaking Muhammad
katani born in a small Saudi Arabian
Village Muhammad struggled with a speech
impediment as a young boy speaking
challenges were a common theme for
Muhammad throughout his life however he
was resilient and continued to face his
fears in 2009 he joined Toast Masters
and six years later beat out more than
30,000 speakers to be crowned Toast
Masters best speaker in the world
Muhammad welcome to keys from Keynotes
thank you so much for having me sir as I
mentioned there in the bio I mean this
speech impediment I want to start right
from the beginning for the benefit of
our audience do you mind kind of giving
the full background and story behind
that I have like a really vague kind of
childhood memory but I do remember when
I was in first
grade um a teacher walked into my class
and he placed a book in front of me and
asked me to read and when I started
reading I was stuttering and and he
actually slapped me cross the face wow
and this was back in the time where you
know stuttering and spe were not was not
something that you know
mainstream and uh he
said there is no hope out of
you you done and he took the book and he
gave it to another student
and
um that one sentence that he said you
know there's no hope out of you kind of
stuck with me I really I really thought
that you know I am
worthless and that was my childhood
until my last year of high school I I I
avoided speaking to anybody I go to
school and come home and lock myself in
my room I spent all my time just reading
by myself because I truly
believed what the teacher has
said that there's no hope out of me I'm
a lost
cost and in my last year of high school
I remember one
day I was leaving the
school and there was a tap on my
shoulder and when I looked over it was
one of the students in my
class remember I took a piece of paper
and a
pen and I
wrote I cannot speak on the
paper and he
said if you were a mute you would not be
in the school you'll be for the Special
Needs school but since you hear that
means you can't
speak your problem is you're
afraid if you want some help I can help
you and I kind of you know KN out of my
head and and he said if you want to
overcome any kind of
fear you have to face the ultimate form
of that
fear and he told me that I should go to
the
principal and ask him to read the
morning announcements which is something
that we used to do in
every like in in my
school read the morning announcement in
front of the
entire School 400
expence and because when you're
desperate when somebody throws you a
life
line even if it doesn't make sense you
will just hang on to
it and that's why I took that
idea and the next morning I went to the
principal and I said I want to read the
morning I want to read the morning
announcement he gave it to me and I
stood in front of 400
students and I still remember it to this
day
I started speaking and I stuttered and
everybody was laughing at
me and I felt
so so
small so
insignificant you know the one thing
that
I that I tried to escape from my entire
life I voluntarily walked right into
it why just because a a guy gave me an
advice and I remember I mean during
recess I went to him and I was really
upset and really mad and I said is that
what he wanted like he wanted to
humiliate me in front of the entire
school and he said success doesn't
happen from the first
time go back and try
again and day after day I kept on trying
and I I don't know why I kept on trying
but every time I cried I realiz like I
noticed that some of the words that I
used St the day
before I don't
anymore which means he was right this is
really the Cure so that was really the
first time I I fell in love of with
speaking and being on stage so Muhammad
I I think that that outlines perfectly
your your attitude resilience and just
this this willingness to continue and
and trying to get past these obstacles
and get better and better and it it kind
of ties into the idea of of practicing
and practicing speaking so now obviously
you are at this Elite level as a speaker
what have you taken from that early
childhood resilience when it comes to
your current speeches with practicing is
that something where you work and work
and work until they get better what does
your practice routine look like for
speeches well um anything it's like
anything in life I when you do it with
passion you you Excel it and for me I
really want I really find out that my
passion is being in front of an audience
and speaking and and at the beginning
when I first started to join TCH Masters
back in 29 back in 2009 I wasn't really
a good speaker but uh I just I love it
you know like I love being on stage I
loved you know sharing experiences and
stories making people laugh and and the
more you do it the more you become
really excellent at it
so it's like anything else in life the
more you do it the more that you excel
at it the problem is a lot of people
sadly sadly they they just lose the
passion you know they they do it once or
twice and they're like nah I'll just I'm
just going to try something else
so
um okay it's like it's like when you go
into the gym and you see this man who's
really puffed up and has all the muscles
in the right places and and you're
thinking wow I I really want to have a
body like that but you don't ask
yourself how
much like how many days and how many
hours did this guy spend just to get to
that
shape and he wouldn't get to that shape
unless he he loved it because nobody
wants to go to the gym every single day
and lift weights every single day it's
you know it's like horrendous but don't
expect results to happen in a day or a
week or a month again if you look at you
know you going to the gym if you go
there to to lose weight you might be
there for like a day or two or three and
then you look yourself in the mirror and
then you notice I I don't see any
change I still look the same a week goes
by two weeks three weeks a month and
every day you look at the mirror and
thinking I don't see any
change why because you don't see the
small incremental changes happening day
over day over day but then somebody else
might see you and say yay man you look
good and that's when you think that oh I
guess it's working
and anything that you do in a consistent
base no matter where it is you will
become an expert at it I love that such
good advice one of the things I know
that you're you're passionate about
Muhammad is is comedy and injecting
humor into your speech and and my
understanding is that that even included
some levels of standup comedy how did
that experience strengthen the humor
within your speeches
so uh I started to do standup comedy
when I was in college and uh I had this
kind of
um like I I had this fear of people
laughing at me because I like I used to
be like I used to stutter when I was
young so I turned the the fear into like
a motive like I thought like I thought
like I thought to
myself if the audience are going to
laugh
anyways they might as well laugh with me
and not and and not laugh at me so I
started to do comedy when I was in
college and I was really really like
really like I did really well when I
like I did like Open Mic lights and so
on but when I started to do speeches I
thought to myself what does the audience
always love the audience always love two
things they love to laugh and they love
to hear stories but you have to walk a
thin line because you want to be
motivational and inspiration but also at
the same time you don't want you you do
not want to come out as a clown who you
know just you know make people laugh all
the time so I had this formula which I
do in all my speeches where the first
half of my speech is usually funny
there's a lot of humor and comedy in it
and the second half is you know the the
Deep stuff and the drama stuff and and
I've always kept this formula throughout
my entire speeches and and it it's been
work it's been working very well so I'm
wondering why structured that way so why
is the the funny part the humor upfront
is there a reason for that is that part
of the straty okay um when it comes to
speeches a lot of people might think uh
or like a lot of you know of coaches
might say I'm going to teach you the
secret recipe to a good speech let me
tell you up front there are no secret
recipes uh it's just a style that clicks
with the audience what I found works for
me is to keep the humor at the beginning
of the speech and to give the message
and the the Deep stuff at the end of the
speech I've seen speakers who do it the
other way around for example they starts
with the drama and then then and then
it's the light stuff at the end I've
seen speakers who make it like a
mountain and a valley so it's like a
roller coaster of emotions like they
make the audience laugh and then they
cry and then they laugh again whatever
so there are no secret formulas one of
the things you do so well as well
Muhammad talking about kind of having
that humor upfront is your introductions
your speech introductions are so
powerful so if we go back to that 2015
World Champion speech you're stood in
front of the audience you pull out a
cigarette and a lighter and you you
actually turn on the lighter and it
looks like you're going to light the
cigarette and I think I heard a gasp
from the audience at that moment I mean
you create this tension and then you
look at them and you say what and then
you lead into your intro which has a lot
lot of humor in that as well you have
these creative powerful
introductions why are powerful
introductions important and how do you
go about crafting these introductions
for your speeches so uh so if you ask
yourself or ask anyone of the listeners
how many presentation you've been
through or how many speeches you've
attended a lot hundreds right and if you
go through all of them you will notice
that they will they all start the same
way hi my name is so and so and today
I'll be speaking about this and that you
know the same introduction that we all
got used to problem with that is because
you got used to it your pro your brain
already
skips before you even introduce who you
are you need to grab the attention of
the audience first it's like it's like
when you go to YouTube right now like if
you go to YouTube and you watch a
clip uh once you click on it the first
thing that you see is an ad and the ad
will last for two for like 3 seconds or
5 seconds and then gives you the option
to skip now let me ask you this question
has there been an ad that you did not
Skip and if the answer is yes let me ask
you this followup question why and the
reason is something happened in the
first five seconds that made you think
huh I want to see where this is going
so even though it was 5 seconds but
something happened in it that made you
want to watch the rest of the ad and the
same thing with the speech if you did
not hook me from the first five seconds
my mind will automatically Skip and
start thinking about something else so
do something spectacular in the first
few second of you speed that will grab
the audience's attention one thing I'm
wondering about so you take on the world
championship of public speaking
obviously would have started at the club
level and grown from there what did you
learn from that whole experience like
what was the biggest
takeaway I remember when I first started
competing in back in
2010 and
uh I won my club and I went to the AA
level and when I got to the air level I
got second
place and when I got second place I was
crushed because I couldn't advance until
the next stage my club president at the
time he was passing by and he stopped by
and he congratulated me in my speech and
he said everybody loved it and I said
yeah man who cares and he said what's
wrong I said dude I got second
place and he said
so I was like man just I mean just look
how tired this cop is you mean like it's
so small I mean I can't even put this on
my
desk and then he said something that
really stuck with me he said Muhammad if
what you're looking
for is a piece of
grass a
trophy I'll go now and I'll buy you
one I'll buy you the biggest one if
that's what you
want and that really
like resonated with me because yes
everybody will be chasing after I don't
know like a a better job a bigger raise
a trophy a title
Fame but it shouldn't really what you're
chasing after all these things are just
keys keys that will open you doors where
you unlock or where you get a chance to
influence more and more
people and from that day forward every
time I took the stage whether I speak to
thousands or even to two or three
people I always given my
all because in my
mind if I can only influence the life of
one
person and that person can change the
life of another
person and the other person will be
changing the life of maybe two other
people and then it started like a ripple
effect
that I might actually be able to change
the entire
world just by the change of one person
you know Fame and money and all these
stuff it will come
later but first of all did somebody out
there learn something from
you I really hope they do Mohamad each
of your answers is like a well
structured it's like a story within
itself self it's such a a treat
listening to you to you talk about this
so for for somebody who's who's thinking
about you know maybe they're a Toast
Masters member they're trying to work up
the courage to take on that speech I
mean that alone is probably great
motivation but from like a a a
tangible maybe strategy point of view
for someone who's done it who's who's
one at the top level what would you
suggest just something to go in I mean
obviously it sounds like enjoy the
process you know try to make an impact
on the audience but is there there one
kind of key thing that that may help
them succeed especially at some of those
early levels all right
so let me talk to you as a person
who who made it to the other side a
person who actually won the
championship I've actually had the
pleasure of speaking to other world
champions and I've been coached by other
world champions as well just let me tell
you it's not as glamorous as you might
think it is m
yes within the toast munity you are
known but
outside nobody knows who you
are I have met a lot of other world
champions and let me tell you they're
not rich they're not as famous as you
might think it is so if it's not money
and it's not
fame then why do you want to
compete is it to win a trophy or a
title I remember in 2018 I was speaking
in a district in New
Zealand and while I was there I
remember I asked the people at the at
the T District I
said David nage the 1999 World Champion
is from is from New
Zealand and nobody knew who he was
except this old man who said oh yeah he
lives actually across the street I was
like wait a minute
you brought me from across the world
around while you had a world champion
across the street and he said yeah but
again nobody remember who he
is so even if you went today in a few
years nobody will even know who you
are so let me ask you this question
again why do you want to
compete I'll tell you
why if you ever made it and I hope that
you
do you will be speaking in front of
thousands of
people with thousands more watching you
online and this is your
chance to give a message to the entire
world now whether you win or lose that's
a different story and I really hope that
you don't focus on that but Toast Master
gave you a chance and the platform to
speak to thousands
people what would you
say and how would you make the world
better place in five to seven
minutes I love that perspective and and
speaking of five to seven minutes I
think it's interesting right because you
you perfected the speech and you had
that powerful message you took your
moment to actually deliver something
that was meaningful to you and of course
yes you wanted highest level but then I
I would imagine sure in the distance you
know kind of the fame rides away that
kind of thing but I would imagine that
at that moment there was probably a lot
of interest people hear oh wow Muhammad
is the world champion you get this
opportunities however when people ask
you to speak for maybe a conference or
an event it's probably not for 5 to
seven minutes and so for you uh somebody
who joined Toast Masters in 2009 what
was that like then sort of needing to
maybe build a bigger speech did you
inject parts of that awardwinning speech
that had drawn people in initially what
did that look like and because I'm
assuming you were asked to give speeches
after that well the funny thing is until
I won the World Championship I've never
given a speech longer than S minutes wow
I only did yeah like I only did Club
contests and area contest division
contests I've never done anything more
than seven like 10 minutes maximum you
know but after I won you know as you
said like I start to get these invites
and people want me to give some Keynotes
and you know you talk about 30 minutes
or 40 minutes and an hour which is
something that I've never done before
now I gave a promise to
myself the speech which is the part of
words that which I won I promised myself
I would never give that speech ever
again and since the day that I W I have
kept this promise to this day I have
never given that speech but again I
thought to myself I do not want to be
known just for one thing that I did in
the past and just repeating it over and
over again throw it away let's start
fresh and the biggest learning that I
had actually happens after I won I had
to actually learn how to engage an
audience for a longer longer time like
30 minutes and 40 minutes and an hour
it's easy to keep an audience engaged
for five minutes it's extremely hard to
do it for like an hour so I like the
biggest learning opportunity that I had
actually happened before I won because I
had to learn how to become a keynote
speaker and not just a five minutes
speech kind of guy that's so admirable
to take this this speech that you know
is tried tested and true it's suc
successful sometimes I think as speakers
I'm guilty of this for sure but you have
something that clicks and it's that loow
hanging fruit to want to always include
it in part of future speeches because
you know you'll probably get the
audience to laugh if whether it's a
story or something like that so that's
one thing I'm taking away from this
conversation right there is is the need
to kind of separate it sometimes and and
continue to grow and come up with
something new Muhammad I'm curious
nowadays you step in front of the
audience do you get nervous
beforehand I still I I always do I
always get nervous whether I'm speaking
to 10 or 12 people or speaking to a
thousands the feeling is still there the
Shivering you know the the the the fast
Heartbeats The Fast breaths and but I
always tell myself and I always remind
my audience when I do like public
speaking I mean courses is fear will
always be with with
you but it's like
skydiving imagine you are in an
airplane with a parachute and he
standing at the edge and you're looking
at this really steep drop Are You Afraid
Of course you are but the choice is
yours you could
say nope no way I'm not going to jump or
you could
say ah and then you let yourself go fear
will always there fear will always be
there but the choice is yours do you
want it to be an
obstacle or do you want it to be a
motive in terms of when you're about to
deliver a speech you have that
nervousness do you have a routine I know
I'm getting like really tactical here
but I'm I'm I'm so curious to hear from
your perspective but do you have a
routine like is there a song you listen
to to pump you up is there you know do
you meditate like what does that look
like in preparation before you take the
stage so two things I always do before I
take the stages I always take really
deep breaths before I take the stage I
do them so much to the point that I
start to feel kind of like lightheaded
and I think that actually helps me with
my like nervousness the other thing that
I do is I always remind myself and again
this is not me being egotistical
whatever but I always remind myself
you have
something that everybody in the audience
are waiting to listen you have something
that they need they need you more than
you need them and when I keep telling
myself this you take the stage you feel
like you are the
rockar you know of a
concert earlier you talked about
delivering a presentation for Toast
Masters in New Zealand I know that you
studied in Arizona you're from Saudi
Arab Arabia have you noticed in
different parts of the world that
audiences react different or that you
need to almost do something different
for you know these Global audiences in
various places well I mean like I've
noticed that like sometimes you have to
kind of tellor your talk in a way that
will fit the audience I always try
myself to pick topics that's kind of
like Universal that you know it will
click with you know people from the west
from the east from the Far East whatever
but what I also noticed that because
I've been blessed and honored to be
traveling all over the world and
speaking all over the world but I've
noticed that people
everywhere are exactly the
same they want peaceful
life they care for each
other they want a much better world now
their interpretation of what much better
word is might be like different from
each other but deep down we all want the
same thing and I've always learned that
whatever
stereotype that you have about anywhere
else in the world I'm telling you right
now we are all the same whether you are
from the US Canada from Europe Africa
India Far East Russia whatever you are
we all want the same thing we want peace
we want everybody to get along
we might have a different interpretation
what that might look like but deep down
we do not hate people for no reason
there's been so much there's been so
much value Muhammad P packed into this
episode in a second I'm G to ask you the
three questions kind of three rapid fire
questions that I ask every single guest
of the podcast but before that I'm GNA
ask you maybe a bit of a challenging
question what's the best thing and
what's the worst thing about Toast
Masters okay the best thing about Toast
Master is it's h it improves you it
improves your your like self-confidence
not just as a speaker in everywhere as a
leader as a communicator and it will
make you think that there's nothing that
you cannot do you'll start to feel like
I can really accomplish anything the
worst thing about t master in my own
opinion is is the sugar coating you know
a lot of new like members when they join
in
the older members did they just want to
encourage them so even if they're not
really good they would try to Sugar Code
the evaluation and make it sound oh no
you did great whatever I really hope
that I can get an honest evaluation
rather than you know a sugar coded one
well said well said I love that so these
F final three questions that I'm gonna
ask every guest keys for Keynotes
question number one who is your personal
favorite keynote
speaker my per my personal and hands
down you know speaker like myv character
is
isi who is the 2014 World Champion now
I've seen his speech on YouTube I've see
I see something in you but again that's
a five minute speech but then I got a
chance to see him give a a 30 minutes
keynote and that is my role model when
it comes to speaking and I always admire
to be at least half as good as he is I
love that answer question number two
what is your most embarrassing speaking
moment my best or my most embarrassing
moment is I was giv a keynote in
Australia and my I was telling a story
and I used the phrase I was pissed now
if you are from the US or Canada or
whatever being pissed means you know I'm
angry yeah in Australia it has a meaning
being pissed me like you know you go to
the bathroom and you're like you know so
when I was speaking when I was done
people were like why are you always
going to the bathroom I was like what
like I go to the bathro so it's kind of
it was kind of like an embarassing
moment oh that's a good one and then
final question for you Muhammad if you
could speak at any venue in the world
where would it be the one place that I
still haven't Spen at and I really would
love to speak to is is is like New York
I think New York is the is one of the
most amazing places in terms of culture
it is has of a lot like a lot of amazing
like theaters and I really wish that one
day I would get a chance to speak in New
York City Muhammad this has been an
awesome conversation thank you so much
for joining me on this episode of keys
from
Keynotes thank you so much for having me
appreciate way